📝 PHP Language page rework (#2271)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/languages/php/_index.md

{{% image-versions-legacy "php" %}}

Note that from PHP 7.1, the images use the Zend Thread Safe (ZTS) version of PHP.

> 

Reviewer: I don't particularly care about the `from` part, but that linked page doesn't speak to ZTS being default (quasi or not) as, as I mentioned, the ZTS thing does cause at least minor inconveniences in places. PHP itself [discusses the matter differently](https://www.php.net/manual/en/pthreads.requirements.php), but it seems like it's a build option that might be worth mentioning somewhere (not necessarily a note like this one).

    locations:
        '/':
            root: 'public'
            passthru: '/app.php'
```

## Dependencies

By default, PHP images use `composer` to manage dependencies.
If a `composer.json` file is present on your project, `composer --no-ansi --no-interaction install --no-progress --prefer-dist --optimize-autoloader` is run during [build](../../create-apps/hooks/hooks-comparison.md#build-hook).

The Composer [build flavor](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#build) uses the latest Composer 1.x release as [a dependency](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#dependencies) to manage dependencies.
To use Composer 2.x on your project, add the following to your app configuration:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
dependencies:
    php: 
        composer/composer: '^2'
```

### Alternative repositories

In addition to the standard `dependencies` format,
you can specify alternative repositories for Composer to use.
The equivalent to `composer require platform/client 2.x-dev` is:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
dependencies:
    php:
        "platformsh/client": "2.x-dev"
```

To install from an alternate repository,  specify explicit `require` and `repositories` blocks:

> 

Author: On a very basic project I tested it out, the syntax works. I just don't have a use-case to test that, but if needed I can do it.

> 

Reviewer: If it works, then I think it'd be worth including Composer 2 as the example for the standard dependency. And just note it in the explanation. I think that might make the possibilities clear without being too complex.

|----------------------------------|---------------|
|  {{< image-versions image="php" status="deprecated" environment="grid" >}} | {{< image-versions image="php" status="deprecated" environment="dedicated" >}} |

## Usage example

Configure your app to use PHP on Platform.sh.

### 1. Specify the version

Choose a version from the [list above](#supported-versions)
and add it to your [app configuration](../../create-apps/_index.md):

{{< readFile file="src/registry/images/examples/full/php.app.yaml" highlight="yaml" location=".platform.app.yaml" >}}

### 2. Specify a dependency manager

To manage PHP dependencies and libraries, use [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/).
PHP containers use Composer 1.x by default. For more options, see [dependency management](#dependencies).

### 3. Serve your app

Web requests are processed as follows:

- Static files such as `.css` or `.jpg` files are served directly by the web server.

> - Requests are handled by the existing matching `.php` files defined in the `root` folder. Nonexistent files are handled by the front controller (`passthru`).

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: `Requests` includes requests for static files.

To define from which URL path the content should be served, [set the `locations`](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#locations).

Note that all requests are sent to PHP.

> In the below example, all requests made to the root of your site (`/`) are sent to the `public` directory:

Reviewer: :clipboard: Avoid directional language: https://developers.google.com/style/translation?hl=en#general-dos-and-donts

```suggestion
In the following example, all requests made to the root of your site (`/`) are sent to the `public` directory:
```

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
web:
    locations:
        '/':
            root: 'public'
            passthru: '/app.php'
```

To have more control, you can [define rules to specify which static files you want to allow](../../create-apps/web/php-basic.md#set-different-rules-for-specific-locations).
See also a step-by-step explanation on [how to create a basic PHP app with a front controller](../../create-apps/web/php-basic.md).

### Complete example

A complete basic app configuration looks like the following:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
name: 'app'

type: 'php:8.1'

web:
    locations:
        '/':
            root: 'public'
            passthru: '/app.php'
```

## Dependencies

> By default, to manage dependencies, PHP images use the latest Composer 1.x release as [build flavor](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#build).
> 

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: This suggestion is for this and the next time together, because they should be together and don't make as much sense separately. But I can't add suggestions over deleted lines, so they're presented separately in GitHub. I modelled it on the Node.js version.

```suggestion
By default, PHP images assume you're using Composer 1.x to manage dependencies.
If you have a `composer.json` file in your code, the default [build flavor is run](https://docs.platform.sh/create-apps/app-reference.html#build):

```bash
composer --no-ansi --no-interaction install --no-progress --prefer-dist --optimize-autoloader
```
```

If a `composer.json` file is present in your code, `composer --no-ansi --no-interaction install --no-progress --prefer-dist --optimize-autoloader` is run during [build](../../create-apps/hooks/hooks-comparison.md#build-hook).

To use Composer 2.x on your project, in your app configuration, add the following [dependency](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#dependencies):

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
dependencies:
    php: 
        composer/composer: '^2'
```

### Alternative repositories

In addition to the standard `dependencies` format,
you can specify alternative repositories for Composer to use as global dependencies.
So you can install a forked version of a global dependency from a custom repository.

> To install from an alternate repository,

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
To install from an alternative repository,
```

specify explicit `require` and `repositories` blocks:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
dependencies:
    php:
        require:
            "platformsh/client": "2.x-dev"
        repositories:
            - type: vcs
              url: "git@github.com:platformsh/platformsh-client-php.git"
```

That installs `platformsh/client` from the specified repository as a global dependency.

The `require` block is equivalent to the composer `require` command:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
dependencies:
    php:
        "platformsh/client": "2.x-dev"
```

> The above is equivalent to `composer require platform/client 2.x-dev`.

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: I think something got misplaced or something here. This doesn't seem related to the alternative repos and the whole section here needs reordering.

$regex = new RegexIterator($iterator, '/^.+\.php$/i', RecursiveRegexIterator::GET_MATCH);

foreach ($regex as $key => $file) {
    // This is the important part!
    opcache_compile_file($file[0]);
}
```

{{< note >}}

Preloading all `.php` files may not be optimal for your application and may even introduce errors.
Your application framework may provide recommendations or a pre-made preload script to use instead.
You have to determine the optimal preloading strategy for your situation.

{{< /note >}}

#### Preloading and dependencies

Your preload script runs each time PHP-FPM restarts, including during your build.
This means it runs before your dependencies have been installed (such as with Composer).

If your preload script uses `require` for dependencies, it fails during the build
because the dependencies aren't yet present.

To resolve this, you have two options:

* Have your script `include` dependencies instead of `require`
  and fail gracefully if the dependencies aren't there.
* Enable preloading with a variable that [isn't available during the build](../../development/variables/set-variables.md#variable-options).
  Then preloading happens only on deploy.

## FFI

> PHP 7.4 introduced support for Foreign Function Interfaces (FFI),

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: I didn't see below that it was only from 7.4+. Might be worth adding, as noted below.

> To access various [services](/add-services/_index.md) with PHP, see the following examples.

Author: Indeed, that was a mistake

{{< /codetabs >}}

{{% config-reader %}}
[`platformsh/config-reader` Composer library](https://github.com/platformsh/config-reader-php)
{{% /config-reader%}}

## PHP settings

You can configure your PHP-FPM runtime configuration by specifying the [runtime in your app configuration](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#runtime).

> You can set the [PHP runtime timezone](../../create-apps/timezone.md).

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: I just realized that this doesn't really fit here. The first sentence relates to the table below, but this breaks it up as is unrelated. It's not defined in the same place and so should be separated.

Some commonly used settings are:

| Name | Default | Description |
|------|-------|-------------|
| `max_execution_time` | `0` | This is the maximum execution time, in seconds, for your PHP scripts and applications. A value of `0` means there are no time limits. |
| `max_file_uploads` | `20` | This is the maximum number of files that can be uploaded per request. |
| `max_input_time` | `-1` | This is the maximum time, in seconds, that your script is allowed to receive input (e.g for file uploads). A value of `-1` means there are no time limits. |
| `max_input_vars` | `1000` | This is the maximum amount of input variables that are accepted per request. |
| `memory_limit` | `512M` | The memory limit, in megabytes, that's set for PHP. |
| `post_max_size` | `8M` | This is the maximum size, in megabytes, per uploaded file. Increase this value to upload larger files. |
| `zend.assertions` | `-1` | Assertions are optimized and have no impact at runtime. Set assertions to `1` for your local development system. [See more on assertions](https://www.php.net/manual/en/regexp.reference.assertions). |

> | `opcache.memory_consumption` | `64` | This is the number of megabytes available for [the OPcache](./tuning.md#opcache-preloading). Increase this value for large applications with many files.|

Reviewer: :clipboard:

```suggestion
| `opcache.memory_consumption` | `64` | The number of megabytes available for [OPcache](./tuning.md#opcache-preloading). For large applications with many files, increase this value.|
```

> | `opcache.validate_timestamps` | `On` | [The OPcache](./tuning.md#opcache-preloading) checks for updated files on disk. This is necessary to support applications that generate compiled PHP code from user configuration. If you are certain your application doesn't do so then you can disable this setting for a small performance boost. |

Reviewer: :clipboard: 

```suggestion
| `opcache.validate_timestamps` | `On` | [OPcache](./tuning.md#opcache-preloading) checks for updated files on disk to support apps that generate compiled PHP code from user configuration. If your app doesn't generate such code, you can disable this setting for a small performance boost. |
```

Reviewer: I realized this whole section is better explained in the section dedicated to it (./tuning.md#disable-opcache-timestamp-validation). So most of this explanation should be removed in favor of a link. And then than section could link here, if necessary⎄

The default PHP values can be retrieved by running `php -i` when SSH-ed into your container.
Use grep to get specific values.
To get the value for `opcache.memory_consumption` you could run something like `php -i | grep opcache.memory_consumption`.

### Customize the PHP settings

There are two ways to customize PHP values for your application.
The recommended method is to [set variables using the `php` prefix](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#variables).

> For example, to change the PHP memory limit, you'd put the following:

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
For example, to change the PHP memory limit, use the following configuration:
```

```

Common functions to disable include:

| Name | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `create_function` | This function has been replaced by anonymous functions and shouldn't be used anymore.|
| `exec`, `passthru`, `shell_exec`, `system`, `proc_open`, `popen` | These functions allow a PHP script to run a bash shell command. Rarely used by web applications except for build scripts that might need them. |
| `pcntl_*` | The `pcntl_*` functions are responsible for process management. Most of them cause a fatal error if used within a web request. Cron tasks or workers may need them. Most are usually safe to disable. |
| `curl_exec`, `curl_multi_exec` | These functions allow a PHP script to make arbitrary HTTP requests. If you're using HTTP libraries such as Guzzle, don't disable them. |
| `show_source` | This function shows a syntax highlighted version of a named PHP source file. Rarely useful outside of development. |

## Alternate start commands

For further control over your app or to run a custom PHP script, a web server or a thread-based worker process, set a `start` command.
See more on [web commands reference](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#web-commands).

> PHP-CLI (command line interface) is the mode used for alternate start commands which differs from PHP-CGI (common gateway interface).

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: This is not the appropriate way to define abbreviations. It's also unclear how a mode affects what can be done here.

> PHP-CGI is the mode used by default in the general runtime.

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: It feels like given this is about alternative commands, showing the default command or something similar would be more clear than talking about the mode.

> If you want to use PHP-CGI with PHP-FPM(FastCGI Process Manager), in the `start` commands, use the `/usr/bin/start-php-app` symlink instead of `php`.

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
If you want to use PHP-CGI with PHP-FPM(FastCGI Process Manager), in the `start` command, use the `/usr/bin/start-php-app` symlink instead of `php`.
```

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: This starts with multiple abbreviations without it being ideally clear why either thing might be desired.

:lady_beetle: The use of the definite article means it's treating the symlink as having already been defined, when it hasn't. What it is and what that means in this context would be helpful to explain.

:lady_beetle: The `instead of php` is a little unclear when that wasn't introduced as an option before this.

> Note that the `start` commands must run in the foreground and are executed before the [deploy hook](../../create-apps/hooks/hooks-comparison.md).

Reviewer: :pick: 
```suggestion
Note that the `start` command must run in the foreground and is executed before the [deploy hook](../../create-apps/hooks/hooks-comparison.md).
```

2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the variable:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:
            start: php <PATH_TO_FILE>.php
    ```

<--->

---
title=Run a custom web server
file=none
highlight=false
---

1. Add your web server's code in a PHP file,
2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the variable:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:
            start: php <PATH_TO_FILE>.php
        upstream:
                socket_family: tcp
                protocol: http
    ```

    By configuring your app to connect via a TCP socket, the `$PORT` environment variable is set.
    You might have to configure your app to connect via the `$PORT` TCP socket, especially when using web servers like [Swoole](swoole.md), or [Roadrunner](https://github.com/roadrunner-server/roadrunner).
3. You might also need to override redirects to let the custom web server handle them.

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    locations:
            "/":
                allow: false
                passthru: true
    ```

<--->

---
title=Run specific tasks
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Create a separate shell script that includes runtime-specific tasks such as clearing cache. That script is executed before your app starts.

Reviewer: :lady_beetle: This step includes the reasons you might want to do something. That logic should go before the steps and the steps should be only the actions taken to accomplish the task.

2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the variables:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:

>             start: bash <PATH_TO_FILE>.sh && php <PATH_TO_YOUR_APP>.php

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: Since `PATH` wasn't being used above and because the path would include the extensions, so it's a little odd to see it separate.

```suggestion
            start: bash <SCRIPT_NAME>.sh && php <APP_FILE_NAME>.php
```

    To use PHP-CGI mode, run your script with the symlink: `/usr/bin/start-php-app <SCRIPT>.php` instead of `php`.
    PHP is run in CGI mode using PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager).

## Alternate start commands

To specify an alternative process to run your code, set a `start` command.
For more information about the start command, see [web commands reference](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#web-commands).

By default, start commands use the PHP-CLI and run your script with `php <SCRIPT>.php`.
Find out how and when to use [which execution mode](#execution-mode).

Note that the `start` command must run in the foreground and is executed before the [deploy hook](../../create-apps/hooks/hooks-comparison.md).
That means that PHP-FPM can't run simultaneously along with another persistent process such as [ReactPHP](https://github.com/platformsh-examples/platformsh-example-reactphp) or [Amp](https://github.com/platformsh-examples/platformsh-example-amphp).
If you need multiple processes, they have to run in separate containers.

Set up alternate start commands to:

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Run a custom script
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Add your script in a PHP file,

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
1. Add your script in a PHP file.
```

> 2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the variable:

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the following:
```

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:
            start: php <APP>.php
    ```

>     Where `<APP>` is a file path relative to the [app root](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#root-directory).

Reviewer: Similar issues as elsewhere (the name and the fact that its not the full file path).

<--->

---
title=Run a custom web server
file=none
highlight=false
---

> 1. Add your web server's code in a PHP file,

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
1. Add your web server's code in a PHP file.
```

> 2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the variable:

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the following:
```

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:
            start: php <APP>.php
    ```

    Where `<APP>` is a file path relative to the [app root](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#root-directory).

> 3. Set the upstream to TCP:

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion
3. Configure the container to listen on a TCP socket:
```

You need to introduce the idea of what "upstream" is, since that's not fully clear from the name. Setting the context might help.

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
        upstream:
            socket_family: tcp
            protocol: http

    ```

>     When you configure your app to connect via a TCP socket, the `$PORT` environment variable is automatically set.

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: 
```suggestion
    When you listen on a a TCP socket, the `$PORT` environment variable is automatically set.
```

As noted below, this isn't actually configuring the app itself. I don't love the language in my suggestion here and above, but I would avoid using `app` here.

>     See more options on [how to configure the upstream](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#upstream).

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench:
```suggestion
    See more options on how to [configure where requests are sent](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#upstream).
```

    You might have to configure your app to connect via the `$PORT` TCP socket,
    especially when using web servers such as [Swoole](swoole.md) or [Roadrunner](https://github.com/roadrunner-server/roadrunner).
4. (optional) override redirects:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    locations:
            "/":
                allow: false
                passthru: true
    ```

    To let the custom web server handle redirects, the .

<--->

---
title=Run specific tasks
file=none
highlight=false
---

To execute runtime-specific tasks (such as clearing cache) before your app starts:

1. Create a separate shell script that includes all the commands to be run.
2. Specify an alternative `start` command by adapting the following:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:

>             start: bash <SCRIPT>.sh && php <APP>.php

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: I would assume people would generally want to start the app similarly to the default. So shouldn't this be using PHP-CGI?

{{< /codetabs >}}

{{% config-reader %}}
[`platformsh/config-reader` Composer library](https://github.com/platformsh/config-reader-php)
{{% /config-reader%}}

## PHP settings

PHP can be used in two modes:

> - CGI (common gateway interface): the mode used in the `passthru`. CGI is a PHP interface to interact with web servers. PHP-FPM (FastCGI Process Manager) is commonly used to run the CGI mode.

Reviewer: When you introduce abbreviations, it should be the full term followed by the abbreviation: common gateway interface (CGI)
https://developers.google.com/style/abbreviations?hl=en#spelling-out

---

By "what benefits come from specifying the mode?", I meant what reasons are there to focus this bullet point on CGI rather than on PHP-FPM. Because this list structure seems to make CGI a strong focus when I'm not sure it should be interesting for users.

Additionally, PHP-FPM can't run simultaneously along with another persistent process such as [ReactPHP](https://github.com/platformsh-examples/platformsh-example-reactphp) or [Amp](https://github.com/platformsh-examples/platformsh-example-amphp).
If you need both, they have to run in separate containers.

{{< codetabs >}}

---
title=Run a custom script
file=none
highlight=false
---

If you want to run a custom script:

1. Add your script in a PHP file,
2. Specify an alternative start command, similar to the following:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:
            start: php <YOUR_FILE>.php
    ```

<--->

---
title=Run a custom web server
file=none
highlight=false
---

If you want to launch your own server to return content and handle user requests:

1. Add your script in a PHP file,
2. Specify an alternative start command, similar to the following:

    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
    web:
        commands:
            start: php <YOUR_FILE>.php
        upstream:
                socket_family: tcp
                protocol: http
    ```

>     By configuring your app to connect to Nginx via a TCP socket, you also enable the definition of the `$PORT` environment variable.

Author: What do you mean precisely with the last comment?

>     By configuring your app to connect to Nginx via a TCP socket, you also enable the definition of the `$PORT` environment variable.

Reviewer: I think I used the wrong link in the previous comment. Should have been: https://docs.platform.sh/create-apps/app-reference.html#upstream
But the idea was that FastCGI has a different protocol. Given that FPM stands for FastCGI Process Manager, I'd assume it'd have that protocol set.

    This variable can be useful as some scripts need to rely on its value to function correctly, which is typically the case when using [Swoole](swoole.md), or [Roadrunner](https://github.com/roadrunner-server/roadrunner). You might have to configure your app to connect with Nginx via the `$PORT` TCP socket.

> 3. Finally, you may also need to override the locations/redirection to let the custom web server handle these.

Author: I guess either all routes have to be declared beforehand and assigned to the right app, or the custom web server should be getting all the traffic to handle, right?

> 3. Finally, you may also need to override the locations/redirection to let the custom web server handle these.

Reviewer: Why does this require multiple apps? I'm confused between what routes you mean as those would probably be defined in `.platform/routes.yaml`? Not really sure what you mean here.

- `curl_exec`, `curl_multi_exec`: These functions allow a PHP script to make arbitrary HTTP requests. These are frequently used by other HTTP libraries such as Guzzle, in which case you should *not* disable them.
- `show_source`: This function shows a syntax highlighted version of a named PHP source file. Rarely useful outside of development.
- `create_function`: It has been replaced by anonymous functions and has no useful purpose since PHP 5.3 and shouldn't be used, ever.

## Alternate start commands

If you're running an async PHP daemon, a thread-based worker process, or something similar, you can start these using alternative processes.
To do so, specify an alternative start command, similar to the following:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
web:
    commands:
        start: php run.php
    upstream:
            socket_family: tcp
            protocol: http
```

The above configuration executes the `run.php` script in the application root when the container starts using the PHP-CLI SAPI,
just before the deploy hook runs,
but does *not* launch PHP-FPM.

> It also tells the front-controller (Nginx) to connect to your application via a TCP socket.

Author: I started to rework that part, I'll have to clarify it further.
